I've seen all these other idols rise and
fall and veganism people like freely
people like durianrider why is it so
rare to find someone in this movement
who's motivated by doing the right thing
just because it's the right thing to do
why is it there are so few people
motivated by saving the animals saving
the planet
ecology even health what have you you
know what I mean why is it that almost
everyone is instead motivated primarily
we're entirely by money fame power
respect sex like you know said Aaron you
know somebody sooner or later has to be
motivated just because they care about
the future of the movement just because
they care about these I hoped it would
be you during the years in which I knew
Aaron Janis she described herself as an
artist she described herself as a
creative artist and I reciprocated by
perceiving her that way by talking to
her that way I didn't treat her as a
political leader and veganism I didn't
treat her as a journalist I didn't treat
her as someone he wanted to be a career
or activist nor someone who wanted to do
public education say definitely not as
someone who wanted to lobby city hall or
petition Parliament or get involved with
the Toronto District School Board she
presented herself as a creative artist
so that was how I spoke to her and that
probably did from the very start doom
our friendship to failure I do not think
of myself currently as a creative artist
here on YouTube nor in terms of the role
I'm playing within the vegan movement
maybe that should change I mean this
trip to Toronto has led me to question a
lot of my basic assumption
so what I'm doing right now what
happened doing last couple of years and
what I'm gonna do in the future
maybe I should really change the rule on
playing and I should become strictly and
primarily a creative artist in relation
to veganism maybe it is things like
writing and illustrating storybooks for
children that I should be doing my time
or creating animations for children
whatever it is I'm gonna be doing in the
future of the vegan movement getting
this but without even said if somebody
asked me what to what extent am i a
creative artist here on this YouTube
channel I'd say well you know that
there's a little bit of a role for the
Arts in this channel there's something
slightly artistic about you know
juxtaposing a video of famous YouTube or
feeding dog food to her dogs while
claiming to be vegan and juxtapose it
with a slaughterhouse where that food is
created and set it to music and have
captions some of those videos are edited
together it is it slightly are just a
little little role for uh for for art
and what I do here but you know for the
most part what I've been doing is
critique commentary as I like to say
active research and informed opinion
whether I'm talking about mainstream
news you know the war in Afghanistan and
now the peace negotiations in
Afghanistan or if I'm talking about
what's been going on within the vegan
movement the vast majority of what I do
here I definitely do not think of as art
nor as art criticism and I grew up in a
household where both of my parents
really began their careers in art
criticism art criticism curatorship at
some extent art history and I was keenly
aware of the important role that not
only patronage played in the arts but
also criticism I knew that a few words
from a well-informed critic or a curator
curator of music a specific art
exhibition curator let alone a museum
curator a few words of guidance could
profoundly impact an hour
and their output for years to come
positively or negatively or both and I
also knew that very hard very often
artists desperately needed exactly that
kind of guidance in feedback it's often
comical actually the extent to which
artists seem to lose touch with how the
public perceives their work
maybe that's less true with something
like music than it is in something like
painted pictures that hang on a wall but
nevertheless I heard a lot of anecdotes
around the dinner table when I was
growing up though my father talking to
artists once in a while my mother
talking artists and really trying to let
them know where their strengths and
weaknesses lie once my father he was
curating a specific exhibition and he
visit a particular artist studio and
what she was proudly displaying was
garbage sort of very poorly executed
postmodern conceptual art and then for
some reason my father walked past the
fridge that was there on sue suddenly he
had to go to the bathroom when he's
walking past the fridge and there are
these really high-quality beautifully
executed pencil sketches conventional
illustrations hanging on the fridge you
said oh did you do this
she said yeah you know I said well wow
you know like looking at this you know I
really think you're a tremendously
talented artist whereas you know he said
'no Politis way possible he did not have
such a positive impression looking at
the stuff she was proudly displaying as
her best work and she said well you know
back when she was going to college she
was really discouraged by her professors
from going into old-fashioned
representational art
sketches illustrate pardon me sketches
an illustration and she professors
really pushed her into this postmodern
conceptual war and you know my father
really made an effort to tell her look
kid this has look that this has a future
and this doesn't that you know the work
she was most proud of he felt really
wouldn't
ever make it in the free market would
never make it on a global level in the
arts and the other hand she had talents
that she was neglecting or taking for
granted it was like look you could
really do something with this ability
you've got with a pen and a paper one
way or another up to you
and yeah I mean I can remember some much
shorter simpler anecdotes well you know
my mother once sitting down and talking
to an artist and really asking him look
how many paintings did you actually
create in the last twelve months you
know how many in total and you know now
you want to do an exhibition well your
rate of painting pictures you need to do
five years before he could select enough
really outstanding works to do an
exhibition of this kind and yeah some
really great painters produce so many
paintings in one year that you can make
a selection to exhibition but you're not
you're not working at that rate and you
can imagine that kind of very simple
fact can be very shocking and very
devastating for a painter to think about
even though maybe they spend all their
time painting they never stopped and
thought oh gee I only produce 20
paintings of last year might be the most
obvious fact but it doesn't seem obvious
to them and they're not hearing that
kind of feedback from whatever their
their agent or the marketing people they
work with the various people who make
money kind of selling their paintings
out of hustling there are one way or the
other so yeah I did grow up with an
intense awareness of this and also
hearing anecdotes about different
artists who responded to critique and
took on to conde directions and
sometimes those those who fail to so
Erin Janice I think she chose to style
herself as a creative artist primarily
as a defense mechanism I think she
presents herself that way to the people
who know her because it means she's not
held to a higher standard of being an
intellectual you know someone who
actually reads books like books by Gary
France aione or offers a critique of
Peter Singer
so people don't expect her to stand up
at a conference like the one that was
just that and really gives some kind of
theoretically sophisticated perspective
on vegan politics or animal rights or
ethics or ecology or what-have-you
people aren't really expecting research
from her that way if she presents
herself as an artist she doesn't want to
present herself as an activist because
she doesn't want people to expect from
her the high level of effort and even
some of the crazy stunts the outlandish
forms of demonstration that are
associated with vegan activism and you
know when you even think about it
someone like James ASPI there's a
certain level of showmanship even for
him let alone if you think about the
more disruptive and outlandish forms of
activism
she didn't want to be in all of that so
in some ways presenting herself as a
creative artist felt safe for her I
think she had a background as a musician
there's still just a few YouTube videos
circulating of her playing the guitar
and she had in a background now quite
embarrassing her dabbling in a cult
spirituality those videos work for many
many years and then she deleted them
from her own channel the occult
spirituality was not the only red flag
with Aaron those of you have really been
following vegan politics on YouTube for
a long time may you remember that she
once conspired with Charles Marlow who
was at that time known as the vegan
cheetah that they conspired together to
sort of destroy the reputation and
career of bite size vegan bite size
vegan is named the channel she's an
activist primarily known as Emily
primarily know about her first name so
if you don't remember that controversy
or if you only saw the first video that
came out cuz it was quite a boring
sequence toward the end of the
controversy Charles Marlow vegan cheetah
vegan cheetah took out his cell phone
and actually scrolled through the
messages to prove that yes Aaron Chyna
said God and touched them Aaron Jettas
had guided him through this she had put
him up to this stunt of basically
accusing
bite size vegan Emily accusing her of
being a of plagiarizing of stealing
ideas from Aaron Janice's videos and
look let me tell you um I might remember
that whole controversy and vegan gains
got involved in being Ian's pointed out
that the main video from Emily on that
topic was actually uploaded before or
Aaron Janice's video but she did have a
more recent shorter video that might
have been influenced by Aronson genesis
view whatever concerns Aaron might have
had at that time wow she really went
about it the wrong way in that
controversy that was a huge red flag in
terms of the conduct of her character in
terms of personal integrity the way she
handled the way she created that
controversy with bite size Emily and
vegan cheetah and today I think not a
single one of the videos related to that
are still on the internet it's possible
vegan gains as response to it is still
on still on vegan gains his channel I
haven't checked sorry loud noise went
off in the background there for a second
it distracted me slightly um having
spoken to her privately over several
years there were other red flags for me
when dealing with Aaron I take it very
seriously when people have self-serving
lapses in memory for me that's a huge
red flag that I don't want to work with
you and I can't trust you if you don't
know what I mean by self-serving lapses
imagine you have an employer imagine you
have a boss at work and sometimes he
promises you things like he says okay if
you do this this and this then I promise
to help you all do this other thing or
I'll reward you with this of the money
and then you get halfway into this task
and it's out but you say you both wait
wait a minute why aren't you doing this
thing you promised to do and he has no
memory that he made that promise I find
that impossible to negotiate with
impossible to cope with and if you only
know someone on a shallow level you will
never
know if they've genuinely forgotten if
they genuinely have a lapse of memory or
if this is a contrived excuse that it's
not a real lapse of memory it's just
convenient for them to assert this as if
they've forgotten you could imagine you
have an employer at work and they get
angry at you for doing something and
then you have to say them wait wait why
you this is exactly what you ordered me
to do three weeks ago
well three weeks ago you you gave me
this as an instruction as in order and
then they're still angry and they say I
don't remember that I never told you to
do this for me that's that's the worst
guy situation to be in it to me that
can't be resolved through reasoning and
it can't be resolved rationally whether
they're elapse and memory is sincere or
whether it's contrived insincere you're
never going to know if you know someone
deeply if you really have it then you
probably can tell you can probably
figure out through Socratic dialogue to
what extent they really are forgetting
or to what extent they're they're
pretending to a forgotten because it
serves their interests but in my
interactions with Janice over pardon
with Janice in my interactions Aaron
Janice over the years she had several
lapses of memory that really left me
cold where I thought whoa this is not
someone I want to trust this is not
someone I want to work with I think that
almost everyone who's known her
long-term even if it's just a few
messages back and forth over the years
will have heard her say many times that
she's working on 12 different new videos
right now and she's also working on a
documentary film and she has a new song
coming out or a new album and she has
like very often and when she talks to
you she tries to give you the impression
that she has this amazing flurry of
activity that she's doing so much as a
creative artist and it's about to come
out the day after tomorrow she sometimes
claims that she's completely finished to
work and even uploaded to YouTube but
then decided the last minute to delete
it
as you know she's uploaded nothing for
several years now oh and you know what
sir it's fine as a choice but if you
know her and she's telling you this kind
of thing I'll never know I'll never know
if that's sincere I'll never know if
she's lying to me and I'll never know if
she's if she's lying to herself but
these various documentaries she was
supposedly involved in these various
projects and new videos and new songs
I've never seen any of them materialized
and she is obviously someone who's been
you know unbelievably fortunate she's
had the support you know not just a view
to benefit YouTube audience she said the
support of many many you know
organizations in the vegan movement
including if you guys don't know about
this there was a there was an
advertising campaign that had her face
and her YouTube channel promoted on huge
billboards by the side of the highway
I think that was in Los Angeles I'm
sorry I forget maybe I'm forgetting
where it was in the United States but in
one of the major American cities and
that was paid for by a charitable
foundation it wasn't paid wasn't paid
for by her wasn't paid for by her
YouTube revenue so she's had some really
extraordinary and certainly rare
opportunities that she never acted on so
Erin gave me a lot of confused and
confusing signals over the years and you
know the fundamental question I had to
ask her was you know if you care if you
really care about this and you've been
handed this tremendous opportunity you
know why aren't you out here or trying
and you know you can try any way you
want to doesn't doesn't have to be
YouTube you know I don't mind you can
you take this at any direction with a
but you've been given this amazing
platform this amazing opportunity and
you say exactly this is what you want to
do but now years have gone by was
something like three years yeah I
started talked to her when I was still
in Victoria yeah it could be four years
now
you know it's it's a little bit like the
the contradictory signals we got from
Gary Yourofsky Gary Yourofsky said that
this was his lifelong dream this was
exactly what he wanted to do and then as
soon as he was handed his dream it
became a nightmare for him and he didn't
want to do this anymore he started
talking about retiring and he eventually
did retire I immediately Yaffe's key
went into this kind of downward spiral
when he'd had his dream handed to him
and his dream was handed to him by a
small number of very wealthy donors by
the way that opportunity was ultimately
bought and paid for as they so often are
in the in the nonprofit you know sector
here in the trust of a small number of
people who made his dreams come true but
then it seemed he didn't want them with
Aaron I mean it was really puzzling
because you know love for this way it's
not that I never doubted her sincerity
it's that I didn't want to deal with her
sincerity but there was no sign that she
was sincere and acting on this amazing
opportunity should be given and again I
will never know you know Aaron still has
several YouTube channels up devoted to
her music it's a guitarist and singer
recording artists maybe what Aaron
really wanted was to be a musician and
it's just happenstance it's just chance
fortune and luck that she had this huge
success as a voice of the vegan movement
maybe what Aaron really wanted to do was
being a filmmaker or some other kind of
creative artist and she ended up you
know a victim of her own success of her
unplanned and accidental success as a
voice for veganism and maybe this really
isn't what you wanted to do if so I
could certainly sympathize with that um
[Music]
when I came back to Canada after a
couple more years in Asia living in
Kunming and then till Hong in China when
I came back there were very very few
activists within Canada for me to get in
touch with
had a shopping list buy gifts to give to
activists in Canada that we might meet
up with and Aaron had told me she not
remember she made I remember this but
she told me she told me that she wanted
to meet up with both myself and Melissa
my girlfriend and collaborate with us
like maybe just make a video with
Melissa made with me but with both but
she wanted to do a series of
collaborations she had some set of ideas
and of course this is surprising she's
like what like hasn't it been like two
and a half years since you uploaded a
video like Wow okay well great sure yeah
happy to do something with you all right
um so when we came back I started
sending and Rijn updates about where we
were in Canada like you know when we'd
be in Ontario as opposed to being on the
west coast and stuff and you know I got
kind of contemptuous and dismissive
messages Zoomer hey you know ultimately
just wrote to her and said look you were
handed the opportunity of a lifetime
here to really be a voice for veganism
you've been handed this amazing you know
whether by chance by fortune you know to
some extent on the basis of the merit of
your videos you know it's always a
combination of these things but you've
been given the opportunity of a lifetime
and I just don't understand why it is
you're letting years go by without you
know taking any action um you know I had
a little bit more constructive criticism
there in that I said I said look I've
seen all these other idols rise and fall
and veganism people like freely people
like durianrider why is it so rare to
find someone in this movement
who's motivated by doing the right thing
just because it's the right thing to do
why is it there are so few people
motivated by saving the animals saving
the planet
ecology even health what have you you
know what I mean why is it that almost
everyone is instead motivated primarily
we're entirely by money fame power
respect
like you know said Aaron you know
somebody sooner or later has to be
motivated just because they care about
the future of the movement just because
they care about these I hoped it would
be you you know I hope you would be one
of those people even though I know she's
a creative artist you know she's not
really an activist she's not a
politician but even so there's a
creative artist that she'd take on that
kind of leadership role and most of what
she wrote back to me were just angry and
incoherent insults just really dumb
really childish in self but that was the
one thing she responded to directly she
said no it is me like I'll show you it
is me I really will be that leader and
now here we are many months later
and I see her at this activist event at
this vegan conference you know in two
separate days I'm standing there looking
at her as she's dead and they're looking
at me neither one of us said a single
word so she neither wanted to scream at
me and let everyone know how much she
hates me nor did she want to bury the
hatchet nor did she want to patch over
the conflict then I'm fine
well Aaron I don't believe in you as a
creative artist I don't believe in you
as journalists I don't believe in you as
an activist I don't believe you know
political as you as a political leader
don't believe in you as a researcher I
don't believe in you as an author I
don't believe in you as an intellectual
I don't believe in you in any of these
ways and I've seen a lot of evidence of
just how crazy you are including you
know your videos about demon demon
possession but the third eye and this
really insane religious views use the
whole you continue holding until pretty
recently including your involvement with
vegan cheetah and
saying you know I don't have any hope
for you that way but still I'd like to
believe that you're sincere when you say
you're gonna step up to this challenge
take advantage of this rare opportunity
you were handed at any rate I would not
like to doubt your sincerity
[Music]